The Problem
Current communication systems in the SCDF for emergency response operations are lacking in digital innovation and can be made more efficient through digitization. 

Under the current system, initial responders will track squad locations and metrics on a whiteboard which is located on site. All information is sent and received by the staff who are operating the whiteboard. Commanders inside the building will communicate with the whiteboard team via walkie talkie which is made difficult by an active fire. As the number of squads on site increases, the whiteboard staff can be overwhelmed by the scale of the operation and their ability to communicate effectively will be reduced. Especially in the case of BA pressure metrics, where a delay in replacing the low pressure squad can be a threat to health and safety, there is a dire need for a more efficient solution.\

The Solution: Centralized Command Module (CCM) 
Our solution would 1) automate the sending of first responder health data from the squad commanders to the whiteboard team) 2) Analyse the provided data in real time and provide a colour signal to indicate the squad status (Green for okay, red to show a need for a replacement squad) and 3) Provide a digital interface (Area Control Center or ACC) for the whiteboard team to keep track of squad locations and resources. 

To expand, we intend to develop a wearable device that will monitor the following health metrics for first responders: Heart rate, Body temperature, Breathing Apparatus (BA) Pressure and hydration status. If any of these measurements exceed a given dangerous threshold, the device will then show the corresponding squad as red, which indicates a need for a replacement. Rather than the whiteboard team having to reach out to each squad commander for status updates, all the relevant metrics are automatically sent to the whiteboard team’s ACC.

Additionally, we are using IBM Watson studio to manipulate and visualize the first responder data into useful graphs that show the real time health status of all firefighters on-site. By doing so, we are able to improve the efficiency of individual squads as they do not need to worry about keeping track of their squad metrics and can instead focus solely on the task at hand. Furthermore, we used the notebook functionality within IBM studio to analyze the first responder data to show the squad operational status (red or green). All of this information is then pushed to the ACC where the whiteboard staff can more easily access squad data. 

In the context of training, real-time access of trainee health data allows commanders to more closely observe life-threatening symptoms of heat injury. Given that firefighting gear obscures the trainee’s face, conventional methods of heat injury observation are not possible. This makes the ability to digitally access trainee data all the more valuable. If and when a trainee’s health metrics reach dangerous levels, their squad status will then turn to red, indicating to commanders that training should be stopped, and medical attention should be sought out. 

These same functionalities can be translated to real life operations in a similar manner. The digitized data improves time efficiency by circumventing the process of whiteboard staff prompting commanders to give updates for BA pressure and squad status. Given the difficulties of communicating via walkie talkie while wearing full firefighting gear, the automatic and digital communication of data will be much appreciated. In addition, in the dangerous context of fighting fires, where the reduced time in relieving a wavering squad could be the difference between life and death.

In large scale operations, where an increasing number of squads are on-site, the whiteboard staff can be overwhelmed by the sheer number of personnel and equipment that needs to be accounted for. The ACC and automatic transmission of status data, again improves time efficiency by circumventing the traditional process. Furthermore, the ability to draw and upload floor plans improves quality of life for the whiteboard staff as they can more easily adapt and translate the operational situation in a digital format. The digital format also allows for communication of operational circumstances to off-site locations which would otherwise be more difficult with a conventional whiteboard setup. 
